Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lob. And today I'm
joined by Doctors Robin Gregory and Brooke Moore. Uh
Doctor Gregory is adjunct professor at the Institute for
Resources environment and sustainability at the University of British
Columbia. And Dr Moore is a district principal in
Delta Schools and also an adjunct professor at the
University of British Columbia. And today we we're talking
about their book, sorting it out, supporting teenage decision
making. So, Doctor Gregory, Doctor Moore, welcome to the
show. It's a pleasure to have
everyone. It's great to be here today. And um
I'm coming in zooming in from the lands of
the Chin and the Muslim on the west coast
of what is now known as Canada. And over
to you, Robin, where are you coming in from?
I'm coming in from near uh what's now the
town of seashell? But the seashell nation and the
Kalish peoples who've lived here for uh thousands and
thousands of years and have kept this environment very
beautiful. So,
yeah, and it's just important for us to, to
do that because most of our province is um
on unseeded territory actually, and so just wanna raise
our hands and offer respect.
So tell us first, what is the premise of
your book? And what rules did you have in
mind when writing it?
Oh, you go, you go, you go Brooke.
The premise of our book is um basically a
model, a six phase model for decision making. And
it's um based in science and it's really aimed
at the everyday user. Um Primarily the book is
written for adults who live or work with youth.
Anybody between 10 and 25 I'd say broadly speaking,
um to help them make good decisions, thoughtful intentional
decisions in their lives.
Since you're talking here in the book specifically about
teenagers, what would you say are perhaps the aspects
of decision making that are the most important to
understand and target in teenagers specifically?
So I think we picked teenagers well, partly because
of the work that Brooke and I have done
with many fantastic teachers in schools which focuses on,
on kids uh sort of between 12 and 18
and then also in the university. But um you
know, that's an age where you move from having
other people make decisions for you to where you
have to make decisions yourself. And there's basically nothing
much taught in schools about uh what does that
mean to make a good decision? We learn about
math, we learn about social sciences, we learn about,
but we don't learn about decision making and yet
I can't think of anything more important for, um,
for anyone to know teenagers, adults, um, than how
to make good choices and what that, what that
means. So, I think by focusing on teenagers, they,
they're at that point where there's still many teenagers
eager to learn their minds are open, their minds
are developing but they're making these choices, little choices
and big choices that will really shape their lives.
And I think the best way to shape your
life is through, uh making good choices. So I
think we wanted to focus on that age and
write a book really for the adults who live
or work with teens, as Brooke said, because many
adults don't, they, they tell their kids well, make
a good choice, make good choices, make good decisions.
They have no idea what that means. They don't
really know. I essentially a good decision would be
what they want. And Brooke and I both really
feel strongly that a good decision should be what
the compatible with the teenagers values. Who is this
person, they're finding out who they are. Um, IT
should be their values, their personality, their agency, which
really shapes it, their decisions, not some rules that
are developed from, from outside. And basically what kids
get are, are rules for good behavior and we
want a process for good decisions. It's quite different.
So a long winded answer.
So in the book, you go through six different
decision maker moves, we're going to talk about them.
But uh just to introduce them and also to
ask you how you got at these six decision
maker moves specifically. So they are from the decision
clarify the matters, generate options, explore consequences, wait Roff
prioritize and choose. And the final ones take curious
and learn. So why these six decision maker remove
specifically
rock? You take this?
OK. Um Those six decision maker moves are based
in the decision sciences which um and it comes
from a model uh developed by Ralph Keeney and,
and some others um called the Proact model. But
we wanted something that was more um plain language,
some words that would be really easily understood by,
by youth and by um people who aren't in
the decision making sciences. Um And we developed them
with um some colleagues of Robins uh Lee failing
and Graham Long and um some teachers that I
work with in Delta. And so through that collaboration
um and a lot of back and forth, we,
we landed on those sex moves. Um Did you
want us to describe what those sex moves are?
Uh Yes, we're going to go through each of
them. But what are the main goals with this
decision maker moves? I mean, what effects do you
expect them to have on teenager psychology?
So, so the Behavioral sciences or Decision sciences, which
kind of grew out of um uh part that
we're looking at a group out of Harvard and
MIT. So Harvard, Ra Ralph Keeney, bunch of people.
Um, AND we're very much following their, their lead
that was really oriented towards either university students or
businesses. So it's not very friendly when it comes
to your, you know, your parents or teachers or
your, your more or, you know, ordinary citizen, uh,
who tends to be just as smart but hasn't
had the, the same training. Um, SO I, I
think, um, there's just, there's a couple of very
fundamental thing. One is that most people, when they
make decisions, they focus on how the decision turned
out. It was a good decision because I carried
an umbrella and it rained. It was a bad
decision if I carried an umbrella and it didn't
rain and that has to do with outcomes, uh
that we can't control, you know, I can't control
whether it rains or not. So I might make
a really good decision but it, it doesn't fit
with the outcome. So I think what Brooklyn I
wanted to do and again, this follows, um, a
lot of work and the values focus of behavioral
decision making. Um Let's start with what the problem
is and what, what matters in this context, what's
important, what are the values rather than getting it
backwards and starting with the alternatives. Um, YOU know,
all of us have sat around a table and,
and somebody says, well, should we do A or
B and it's like I don't know why, why
would we do either one? What matters to us,
what's important. So, we've got, we've got the cart
before the horse, we've got the whole thing backwards.
And I think that was maybe the strongest message
of what we're doing is you've got to start
by focusing on the right decision and really paying
attention to your values, which is talk about it
later, I guess. But it's a lot harder than
it might seem.
And, and what do you think is the role
that adults can play here when I mean, people
are still teenagers when it comes to supporting them
and guiding them in their decisions with these decision
maker moves in mind.
One of the things that adults tend to do
if they don't have the decision maker moves in
mind is they will say we'll go with your
gut or um they'll offer advice as to what
they would do or they'll say, well, think about
it, you know, really think about it, think about
what you wanna do. Um And what the decision
maker moves do is offer uh more uh mentorship,
kind of mindset and role so that the adult
in the youth life can ask questions and not
lead them to a particular answer. But um help
them develop those thinking skills. And that practice of
thinking deliberatively um from a values based beginning. And
the thing that I really enjoy about it is
that, um you know, and I have a 10
year old, she just turned 10 and a 13
year old and, um, I can do it really
slyly. Like, I don't have to make it a
big event. I can just, yesterday we were literally
walking to, at the store and my daughter had
a couple dollars, she was allowed to buy some
candy with and she was like, I've got to
make the decision. Do I buy the, this candy
or that candy? And I just for kicks, um
use the decision maker moves with her and it
was really enjoyable because I got to see her
thinking and I got to support her thinking. Um
AND I, you know, it was a pretty safe
choice to let her have full ownership over. So
she got to live with the consequences of her
choice, which is also a really good learning opportunity.
So as a parent and also as a teacher,
um it's a really beautiful role to play when
you can, when you can just be asking questions
and not telling, you know, that there's space for
them to develop who they are and through how
they think. Um And that's a just a beautiful
space to be because I think the,
the curiosity asking questions um that, that was nice,
Brooke is um I think really key to what
we're doing because if you just, if you're a
teenager and you're faced with a bunch of rules,
do this, do that um There's not much to
be curious about you kind of grudgingly do something.
Um Whereas if you're in an environment that fosters
curiosity, that's also curiosity about other people. So if
you have a say, a small group of kids
who are 14 or 15, one thing we'd really
like to develop is having kids be curious about
why others might see the world differently than them.
You know, why Brook's child's friend might want different
candies than she wants, you know, like what's going
on. So you get this dialogue between people and
you know, I think um that dialogue, that kind
of curiosity is so much missing among mu you
know, much of the adult world if you look
at the world of politics and what's going on.
So I think if we can just little tiny
bit encourage that curiosity, compassion, better listening among teenagers,
maybe, maybe, maybe, maybe the world will someday be
a better place. So I think that's, that's there
too and it can start with something as simple
as you know, take your $2 and go buy
candy. Uh YOU know, think about what you want
and realize that you'll deal with the consequences. I
think that's, it's a great lesson.
So I imagine that when it comes to the
bit about really having a good understanding that other
people might think differently might have other values. One
goal here would also be to try to avoid
a naive realism,
right? Yes. Yes. And misinformation which goes along with,
uh, right. So, a and in what way should
teenagers be given a voice in their choices? Because
of course, we shouldn't just let them do whatever
they want but to what extent and, uh, I
mean, uh, it, how much should we listen to
them and in what particular circumstances, let's say
that's a, that's a question that goes beyond a,
again. We, we wrote a book about decision making
and part of your question touches on um uh
cultural backgrounds, religious views, all sorts of things on
which we are not experts. Um So I, I'm
got you,
it will be different for every, every parent and
every teacher, the degree of autonomy that they want
to extend in space, they want to extend to
the, to the youth in their lives or in
their work. Um So that question aside, that'll be
a decision for every adult. But that question aside,
once you do have some space where you decide,
defined as, as safe to play or, or, um
that you're going to encourage, this is sort of
like a, like a map to help you through
that space. Um Because even in classrooms, like often
teachers uh when they're having a class, make a
decision, they'll resort to voting right. We'll have a
big vote. And what the decision maker moves do
is create a space for thinking rather than taking
sides. And um and that has in the classrooms
that we've been able to witness. It been a
really beautiful dialogue like Robin mentioned earlier where the
discussion is, OK. Well, if that really matters to
you and this really matters to me, and we
can both agree that they matter to the large
group to some extent. Um How can we navigate
our way through this? And, and it does um
create a space for perspective seeking um rather than
just perspective taking like in a voting situation. So
I think regardless of the space or the length
of um of rope you want to extend to
the youth in your lives, this is a way
to help you do that in a, in a
really thoughtful way
length of rope probably isn't the analogy we want,
right?
No, it's not a good one.
Um Brooke mentioned thinking though and, and another basic
thing is, and this goes back to um work
in the nineties and the behavioral sciences and Danny
Kahneman book Thinking Fast and Slow, the best seller
around the world um is that there has been
also an emphasis on thinking and reflection, pause and
reflect, you know, look before you leap. Um Actually
many, many of the decisions we make are powered
by our emotions or intuition and are made extremely
quickly. So something we try our best throughout the
book to pay attention to is that um there
are these two modes of thinking and one is
very quick, very automatic very fast and the other
one is much more reflective. So for a lot
of the daily decisions you, you go with, you
go with your emotions, you go with your intuitions.
Uh YOU have to um but then for the
more consequential decisions, we want, we want that. OK,
let's think about what the, what's, what's going on,
what are values, et cetera. So it's not um
it's very different from, say much of the critical
thinking literature or other words like that, that are
used in education and that we really do try
to leave a, you know, a big place for
that other, that other mode of thinking, the emotional,
the intuitive.
So you mentioned Daniel Kman there and he, of
course, did lots of work on biases and heuristics,
for example. And in the book, you also talk
about what you call decision traps. So what are
these? And could you tell us a little bit
about things like anchoring, numbing availability and the sort
of effects they have on our decision making?
I start this one Robin and then maybe you
can finish
it. Let's go for a couple hours here. This
is a great topic.
The decision traps is really what, um attracted me
to this line of, of learning. Um I certainly
didn't know much about them beforehand before meeting with
Robin and working together. Um And it appealed to
me because it's such a human way of moving
through the world that we, um, that fast thinking
brain trips us up all the time and we
use the term decision traps. Um, uh, THERE'S a
lot of other scientific words for it that RNA
is much more familiar with, but the decision traps
because it's just this plain language way of thinking
and our, uh, way of talking about it. But
we see this all the time and what we
do in the book is we list some of
the really common ones. What we do when we
work in, with people with classrooms and with groups
of teachers is, um, I'll often put up a
list of them and, uh, I'll say which one
resonates the most with you, which one is most
familiar in your life. And after a few seconds
and the people looking at the list, they'll start
giggling because all of them are very familiar to
us because, um, it's just how we're wired. And
so, um, we can see them, you know, in
our own lives, but we can also see them
in the headlines of media right now where and
in our algorithms of social media where we've got,
um, in our social media feeds, the algorithms push
people that think like us into our feeds. And
so we sort of seek out, um, to confirm
our bias, confirmation bias is one of those traps
and don't, without even knowing it, we become much
more polarized in our, in our views and our
spaces and So the decision maker moves, offers us
a way of slowing down because it's not enough
to say that somebody we'll just slow down and
think about it more. Um THE without any hand
holding as to what to think about and ways
of making that visible. And so the decision maker
moves, help you navigate through what could otherwise be
um many, many traps waiting for you in that
fast thinking way.
Yeah. So I do a lot of work um
helping governments make various decisions. Um The same stuff
comes up if I'm working with a senior government,
you know, or elected officials. Um In that, yeah,
these biases are just errors in decision making that
every human um is prone to uh and knowing
about them helps prevent them. So you mentioned like
anchoring, anchoring is where a first impression or your
sort of starting point, then conditions everything else you
think about something. Um uh So, so you anchor
on that first impression, which means you're closing off
to some later information that you get numbing is
a, is a big one. For, I think that
uh talking about social media in that, I think
it's very easy if we hear news, like hear
news about the war in Ukraine, we hear day
after day after day and on the, you know,
78th day when you read about something, how do
you still contact that place in yourself to feel
compassion for, for those people. Um, AND how do
you, how do you deal with, you know, large
numbers, um, if, uh, if 10,000 people have been
injured in an earthquake, well, it's actually, you know,
turns out to be 20,000, that's 10,000 more people
who are inconvenienced or hurt or in the hospital,
or that's a huge number of people. So, I
think it's very hard for us to give meaning
to, um, meaning to larger numbers, meaning to ongoing
events and knowing that that's a tendency we have
to become to become none and numb and sort
of shut it off. I think we can work
within ourselves. We can work with other people. We
know to try to, you know, overcome that to
fight against that. Um But if you're not aware
of it, then then just kind of takes you
over. So that's the way it is with a
lot of the more emotional intuitive um aspects of
our thinking is that being aware of them as
a trap, as something that can lead you from
making good decisions. Um Is it, it's not a
cure? It's not that the, you know, not that
that possible bias or error goes away, but it,
it helps, you know how to kind of keep
your humanity, keep who you are as you go
forward in the world.
I guess we also have to be aware of
the bias blind spot, right? Because uh sometimes we
might have that tendency that because we learned about
the biases, then we think that we are no
longer susceptible to, to them. But that is probably
not the case right
now. There's a great interview with, with uh Dan
Koman who's, you know, certainly one of the world
experts on decision making. He talks and laughs and
laughs about stupid decisions that he still makes, uh,
because of anchoring, because of numbing and so on.
So, yeah, it's, um I think we all, we
all make, make those errors. Um WHICH is part
of again, why? It's, it's good to have we
talk a lot about working with others if I'm
making a decision with Brooke and I'm starting to,
to anchor on something or, you know, be prone
to numbing Brooke can remind me and say, hey,
Robin, you know, here's look at what's going on.
So having that, that collaboration um is, is often
really helpful
that's really powerful with kids too. And when we
say, well, who else is, who else's opinion? Might
you want to seek out on this or who's
thinking isn't in the room right now? Um And
that's important for adults as well. Um But also
when we're thinking about the health of our communities
and we're making decisions as youth or as adults
to think about whose voice isn't at the table,
is, is a really key question. Um And the
diversity of perspectives is actually a pretty powerful place
to, to move to you know, move from when
you're making that decision. And so having those questions
really readily available to you and, and the more
you practice, the decision maker moves, the more they
are there um for you to draw from is
a, is a pretty powerful way to move and
avoid some of those traps um but move through
them as well,
right? So let's go through each of the decision
maker moves, then the first one is framing the
decision. Could you perhaps give us uh an example
to illustrate it? And when it comes to framing
decisions, which kinds of questions should be asked?
My favorite. It's a very simple example, but it
seems to do the trick in sharing about the
importance of framing a decision is about um this
example, if I say, should I cut my hair
or not, you know, and people say, well, yes
or no. And then we, I say, well, how
many options are there? Like is that a very
small scope or, or a large scope? And people
say, well, it's a pretty small like you, there's
really only two options, you cut it or you
don't? And then I just ask them to hold
their hands there and say, OK, I'll give you
another decision frame another way of framing that decision.
Um How should I style my hair and suddenly
and you know, when everybody moves, oh, it's a
bigger scope. And so what happens is you increase
the scope of your decision frame is that you
increase the possibilities available to you. And sometimes that's
a great idea and sometimes it isn't. But the,
the cool thing about working with kids is having
them realize that whoever frames the decision holds the
power. And so when, when adults are framing all
of the decisions for kids, they have very little
agency. Um BUT if they have space to frame
a decision, then that gives themselves some owner more
agency over their decision and as a result, more
um ownership over the consequences, which is a really
good thing for kids to learn early on. So
um the importance of choosing that scope really intentionally
is, is the first move because everything else will
come from that.
We, we use the analogy in the book of
um um using a camera. So you can either
zero in on just a small part of a
picture or you can zoom out and get a
much wider picture. And I think human beings tend
to sort of zero in. But as a result,
you can miss a lot of consequences and particularly
consequences that may not be happening right now. But
what happened later on, I think it's part of
the issue with climate change, for example, is it's,
it's hard to, it's hard to think in the
future because it's not right in front of you.
So enlarge the frame. What's the problem you're looking
at and think about long term consequences. It, it,
it can change, change our, our choices, change our
decisions dramatically.
Oh, you, you just froze Robin. I'm sorry. Uh
I was just waiting to see if you would
come back. Oh, you're back now. Yeah. So, uh
and the second movie is about clarifying what matters.
So what does that mean exactly? What is the
process here?
So, in, in every decision, the, the reason why
we want to make a choice is because something
that we care about will be affected will be
impacted if um you know, I may care a
whole lot about whatever my hair as Brooke was
just saying, but my hair isn't going to come
into every decision because it's not going to be
impacted. Um But uh that process of thinking, what
is it that matters to me in this, in
this particular context? So again, in this context means
you've, you've got that frame. Um It's, it's really
important because the first things that come to mind
may be things about myself, but right behind that
will be, oh, what, what about my family? What
about my friends? What about my neighborhood? So you,
you, you think about, OK, what really is at
play here in this decision and, and what matters?
And there's um interestingly there's a lot of behavior
decision research showing that even, you know, professional decision
makers, CEO S and companies, that kind of thing
usually um only are aware of about half of
their objectives. So if you, if you ask people
to go, you go around a room with adults
or with teenagers and ask people to write down
what matters to you about. You know, where we
go for a, a year end celebration of our
sixth grade class or what we want to care
about, you know, with Toyota in terms of designing
a new car, um those professional decision makers who
only think about maybe half of the things, 40%
of the things that are important. So you go
around a room and different people think of different
things and it's like, oh yeah, that, that thing
is also important to me. I didn't think about
that. Oh yeah, that uh so the process of
supporting teenage decision making, that's the subtitle of the
book um is really encouraging um that teenager to
explore who he or she or they are. You
know, what is it that makes that teenager that
uh that special person and what matters to them?
So it's, it's uh it's not just sort of
looking forward to the decision and consequences, but it's
also very much uh looking internally. Um YOU know,
who am I? And at age 1415 or at
age 70 I think those are questions we should
all be asking ourselves, who am I? So what
matters to me? It's kind of the same thing,
who am I, what matters to me?
And I guess this takes us back to the
fact that this is a values based approach because
uh I mean, to go through all of these
decision maker moves, we have to uh keep in
mind what uh our values are, what the teenagers
values are and their goals, right? I mean, this
is, it, uh it has a very big element
of subjectivity to it.
Well, and, and, and there's a tension there too
which we talk about a little bit in the
book. But you know what if you have a
14 year old uh as, as your child and
their values are quite different from your own uh
as, you know, as the parent or as a
teacher. Um So how, how do you handle that?
How do you work with that dynamic? And, you
know, on what occasions is it OK, on what
occasions is it, is it not? Ok. Um It's
the same thing actually for people who work, say
for a large company and there's goals of the
company and there's their own individual goals and how
do they, how do they adjust those two imbalance
or people in a relationship? You know, the, the
two people in a relationship may not always agree.
So, um it, I think that's, it's that tension
because, you know, I know if we go deeply
enough, Ricardo, you and I would have some, you
know, some differences of opinion on things. But does
that affect our friendship? Does that our ability to
work together. So it's, I think that's, it's a
fascinating thing. It's not something, um, not something to
be avoided, not something to pretend it isn't there.
Uh, BUT we really feel like it's important for
those values to, to come forward and to be
discussed and if you do want to support your
teenage decision maker, um, it's important to help, help
them clarify their values and who they are.
And about the third move, how do we generate
options? How do we go about it?
Well, well, one of the ways with kids is
is brainstorming and um there are a lot of
strategy, like that's a pretty common strategy for teachers
to use and brainstorm. Um But once you get
beyond the obvious sort of choice uh options that
come to mind um to go a little bit
deeper and really probe that is important. So we
offer a lot of different questions that can help
with that and some exercises in the book that
can help with that. Um But perspective seeking is
a really big part of that. So to avoid
those um confirmation by us and other other decision
making traps to say like, well, what would so
and so suggest or, or um whose voice are
we missing here? What can they offer? Because tapping
into that creative brain and this is a really
creative thinking space, um It's so important to go
beyond the obvious because um that is a trap
that our, our system, our fast thinking system will
lead us into
and, and, and once you, once you know your
objectives, once you know what matters, it totally changes
that search for alternatives because then you're coming up
with, you're trying to come up with alternatives which
help achieve your objectives. If you don't know, there
are those objectives, you kind of don't have a
road map. Why would one alternative be better than
another? Who knows? But if you can link them
back to achieving objectives, I think you've got a
much more solid basis for, for, for choosing an
action.
And why is it so important for us to
generate different options? What is the role that that
specific step plays in decision making?
Ha having um one of the common places where
people start a decision making process without the decision
maker moves is that they'll start with the options
and they'll say like, you know, where are we
going to go on vacation or what are we
who, you know, all sorts of things that come
up? And we sort of often lock ourselves into
a binary or into a limited set of options.
And so um having a more expansive approach beginning
first with a, a frame and then thinking about
what matters, make sure that our options are grounded
in those two places. And that's a much more
helpful starting place because um it gives us a
much um more grounded beginning place. But also a
more meaningful one. So maybe the options that come
to mind before we've used, the decision maker moves
aren't even relevant in the end once we've gone
through it and having that uh lens of what
really matters in this context before we start imagining
what might be possible, make sure that we're moving
in the, in the right direction for, for this
context. So generating options, um sometimes it goes really
quickly and sometimes it's really tough because we're really
locked into our initial thinking or, or we don't
have enough perspectives in the room. Um But it's
so important because otherwise we've limited ourselves unnecessarily and
this and this really is the where creativity comes
in big time. So you can, you can really,
um and it's fun, you can see groups, um
you know, groups of kids, groups of adults when
they actually start thinking outside the box or when
they enlarge the size of the box gets so
excited and start sort of jumping up and down
and smiling and it's like, oh yeah, there's something
we hadn't thought of before that would be a
great thing to do. So let's do it. So
it's, it's, it's, it's like sort of a payback
part. It's very exciting
and about the move of exploring consequences. I mean,
what kinds of consequences should teenagers consider here? Because
I, I mean, even for adults, many times, it
is very hard for us to really figure out
what are all the likely consequences and the ones
that are really hard to predict beforehand.
One of the nice ways about Sorry Robin, you
say quick here. But um the nice part about
this for me is that it, it cuts down
on the overwhelmed because in the decision maker moves,
you look at each option and the consequence on
each of the values. And so I don't have
to think about the whole big picture. I can
just go very methodically uh how will this option
impact this value and how will it impact another,
the other value and so on. And so that
really helps especially um with adults or kids, but
it just helps to take a step back and,
and think about it really deliberatively in pieces before
we look at the whole
and you're also thinking here of in, in terms
of consequences, there's two other things that always come
up. One is that question of the frame. Am
I looking at consequences over the next day, over
the next week, over the next month? Uh And
I think that's a really big one for teenagers
because some things that for a teenager that may
be very attractive in the moment for the next
couple hours, go to that party, you know, et
cetera, et cetera. Um If they think about the
longer term consequences, maybe, maybe that may maybe something
different will happen. So it's partly that side and
the other side is uncertainty in that thinking forward
to consequences involves uncertainty and making predictions. And uh
that's a, you know, that's not something that, that
anyone does hugely. Well. So I think it, it,
it involves that element of uncertainty. Where do you
get your information and what do you do given
that looking forward, um you know, you're making predictions
but they may or may not happen.
Uh And I mean, of course, as you mentioned,
there, there are different kinds of consequences. Some of
them are perhaps more short term, others long term.
And maybe, I mean, in certain specific cases situations
where maybe be we might be thinking about short
term consequences. If they are just short term, short
term and not a big deal, maybe we can
just not uh give too much thought to uh
at least those ones, right?
Yeah, I mean, obviously there's, there's certain consequences. I
mean, if you think about waiting or, or paying
attention to consequences, some consequences are really minor. And
so you don't have to put much attention on
that, but other consequences may have much, much more
long lasting or maybe they affect other people, you
know, it's not just what affects me, but how
can my decisions affect others? Um So yeah, that's,
that's part of where the individual um develops that
subjective judgment about what is it that they're gonna
pay particular attention to and, and, and it may
be that they also want to go out and
get more information, like, you know why, that's what's
an example, buying a used car and I wanna
think about, oh, I don't want a car that's
gonna take a lot of repair work on down
the line. And so I have to compare two
or three or four different models of cars. II,
I need to go out and collect some information.
Where do I go to get that information? What's
a trusted source? Um And it may be that
after hearing, you know, the repair bills from three
or four cars, I think, I don't, I'm not
actually gonna get a car, I'm just gonna stick
with the bus. Um But is that it's like,
so there's a lot involved in that, in that
uh consequence step.
And part of, part of the neat thing about
seeing that in a classroom too is that it
becomes a research project, which is much more meaningful
than like a book report because kids are posing
their own questions and then they have to seek
that information and highlighting that uncertainty and then navigating
through it is a pretty powerful practice for kids
to be working on
and they're, and they're following that line of thought
because something matters to them. So that, that's, that's
pretty cool. It's kind of engages kids in a
different way. And like Brooke said right at the
beginning, they don't have to know that they're working
on decision maker. Move number four, I couldn't care
less about that. But, but they're, what they're doing
is they're taking in, like, you know, eating a
food they're taking in this process and into their
body and if they use it on a couple
of school projects, hopefully they'll use it on something
out of school as well.
How about weighing trade offs? I mean, what are
the reps, the aspects that are important to consider
here?
I'll take a first shot that, that gets back
to thinking about consequences again in that, you know,
the different consequences of different actions. Um You, I
have to think, well, if I do, if I
do a, it's going to be great in the
short term, lousy in the long term. If I
do b it's just the reverse. So then I
have to, I can't, I can't have the best
of both. So what do I, what do I
want to do? Maybe I can construct a new
alternative. But um it's really thinking, uh that there's,
there's nothing that's going to satisfy all of my
values, all of my objectives. Absolutely perfectly. So I
have to make a choice what's most important and
you know, what's, what do I have the most
opportunity to actually follow up perhaps where, where is
the uncertainty the lowest? So, you know, you start,
you start realizing that um there aren't binary choices,
but even if you have like five or six
or seven different options, they all probably have some
sort of golden side, some really neat part, but
then they have some downsides. So how do you,
how do you live with that? How do you
adjust to that? And most of the things that
we wanna do, um, because we want to do
them also have a downside. You wanna be on
a sports team because you love soccer. But that
means you have to exercise and work, you know,
you wanna whatever, be a chef at a restaurant,
but that means you're not gonna get much sleep
for your first couple of years. So it's that
kind of thing. And how do you, how do
you make those trade offs and fe and feel
ok with them, you know why you're doing it
because you want whatever that benefit is.
And I would imagine that at a certain point
because we have different values and maybe perhaps in
different situations, we would prioritize different sets of values
over others at a certain point, we just have
to go and make a decision because otherwise we
could be here and infinite and considering possible consequences
and trying to trade off between different values and
objectives. Uh Right. I mean, there, there it comes,
there comes a point where we just have to
go ahead with the decision, right?
You sound like a national government. There's, that's a
real problem with a lot of big national government
decisions is that they try so hard to get
everybody's views that you know, six or seven or
eight years later, they're still working on the decision.
Sorry, Brooke, I think, think I cut you off
there.
No, you didn't. You didn't. I was just thinking
of a story about a grade 67 class, Joanne
Calder's classroom. A teacher we work with quite often
here and, um, her students were trying to decide
how they should organize the chairs in the room
where the desk should all be. And if you're
12, that seriously matters to you, like, you have
a lot invested in where you're gonna be sitting
for a few weeks in your classroom. So they
had come down to a couple of options and
the class was super happy, kind of with either
one, they would accept either one. NOBODY was opposing
it except for these two boys who did vociferously
oppose both options and in a fit of frustration
after, you know, trying to come to cons to
consensus for so long, one of the kids said
to the, to the boys, like, what is it
gonna take to get you to agree to one
of these options? And the boys offered a tweak
on one of the options and that ended up
satisfying the whole class and they all moved on
quite happily, um with full understanding about why they
were all sitting where they were sitting and they
had ownership in that um piece of building their
classroom community. And so it's a very simple example,
but when you're 12, those stakes are really high
and they were able to move through a dialogic
process that in the end the tradeoffs were ones
that they could all deal with. Um, AND they
could be in community with one another. And so
that's, that's a pretty big piece of it is
knowing what tradeoffs are you willing to make and,
and which are like a nonstarter. And then if
you have some that are, you know, you can
accept both options, then it's, um, you go into
that with a sense of clarity that otherwise you
might miss
whenever you say the word dialogic, I think, boy,
this person is really smart.
I think that about you all the time,
Brooke was just talking about ownership and, you know,
that's, I think we use the word agency but
agency ownership, like how many teenagers have owners feel
they have ownership over their lives? I think, you
know, a lot, a smaller percentage than I would
than I would like to see. But can I
back up just for a moment because a couple,
a couple of things that have one is that
when we talk about tradeoffs, tradeoffs is, is kind
of a nasty word, right? It's like, oh, I
have to face tradeoffs and you sort of get
that depressed feeling. Um, BUT that actually is true
of decision making generally. Like we have to make
a decision. It's like, you know, there's sort of
a tension involved with that. And I think one
of the messages that Brooke and I are really
trying to emphasize through the whole book is that
actually your decisions are opportunities, decisions are, are opportunities
to express who you are to change your little
bit of the world. Um And, and so there's
sort of, there's an excitement about decision making that
um that only comes if you see it as
opportunities rather than as solving a problem. And then
there's another problem and they aren't problems, they are
opportunities. Um And I think that also comes very
strongly out of the negotiations literature. There's a lot
of what we do that was codeveloped with people
who do um negotiations work books, like getting DS
uh in terms of getting people to work together
to make decisions and to face, to face tradeoffs
and to realize that by doing that um new,
new opportunities will open up. So it's an exciting
thing. It's not a, it's not a dismal science.
It's an exciting thing. Economics can be the dismal
science. But I think decision decision making is an
exciting science.
A and I guess that with that idea in
mind that it is an exciting thing to do,
we get into the last decision maker move that
is about staying curious and adjusting. So what is
this really about? What does it mean to stay
curious and adjusting if necessary?
Ok. Um I often talk about this with, with
students in terms of, um, not getting too attached
to something or being stuck with the decision just
because you made it. And that is, uh, a
decision trap that we fall into quite naturally. Well,
I've already, you know, spent this much money on
the choice I made now I'm stuck with it.
Um, AND that might be true sometimes but to
recognize when it isn't true and when you are
able to be flexible and adapt is, is really
crucial. I would really love kids leaving our school
system to go out into the world knowing that
sometimes they are going to need to change their
mind. And that changing your mind is a uh
marker of intelligence and a active a activity. And
those are not things to fear. It's when we
become too entrenched in our thinking that that we
can run into trouble um as community and as
individuals. So um circumstances are gonna change. And so
the, the decision that you made might have been
right last year and now it's different and you
need to make moves to adjust to that and
especially when they are leaving school and maybe thinking
about what they're gonna do after they graduate, um
kids are not forced into but sort of pressured
to make all these really big decisions. Like what
post secondary education am I going to engage in
or program or not? And if I, you know,
enroll in this program two years down the road,
I realize I don't want to do that for
the rest of my life. Am I able to
change? And sometimes changing your mind is a privilege.
But to know when it is and when you
can take advantage of that is, is really important.
And I would imagine that is, has a lot
to do with the fact that there's a lot
of always a lot of uncertainty when it comes
to our decision making, right? Even when considering the
consequences and win the tradeoffs. I mean, if things
happen and I guess that in this particular point,
probably the strikes would be right when they told
us that we should care about what we can
control, but not about what we can't control because
there's a huge amount of stuff out there that
we can't really control and sometimes even, uh what
appears to be a perfect plan just goes off
the rails because of something that we couldn't, uh,
know of.
Right. Yeah. And I, and if you're, I mean,
we all have constraints on us but Brooke and
I happen to live in a, in a place
where, where people, you know, most people generally have
a fair amount of freedom, not everybody in the
world does that. So, um, if you, uh black
education, if you're poor, uh maybe the cultural environment
in which you live, um, you, you're in terms
of changing your mind doing something different. There, there's
probably more constraints perhaps on you. And so we're,
we're realizing, you know, we, we are aware of
the fact that the adjustments you make might be,
you know, might be smaller. You still have choices,
you still have decisions. But it's probably a more
constrained world that you live in than what most
of the teenagers we work with live in.
But of course, it is one thing for things
to go unexpectedly wrong. But what about mistakes? How
should majors deal with mistakes?
I was thinking about mistakes. I think that's one
of the roles we haven't specifically used this term,
but the decision mentor, uh which we talk a
lot about in the book, the person, the adult
who is working with the teenagers could be a
parent, grandparent friend, aunt, uncle, uh teacher, cousin, coach.
Um BUT I think that the adult is that
is, I think in a, in a really special
position here with respect to mistakes because um I
think we all learn from our mistakes. Uh BUT
we don't wanna make, you know, horrible mistakes. We
don't wanna make mistakes that are life threatening. We
don't wanna miss make mistakes that will carry the
scars over the rest of our lives. And so
I think that that's a real important role for
the adult, um you know, making choices about careers,
but also things like, um you know, sports and,
and just kind of keeping, keeping track of what's
a safe zone so that uh a teenager can
learn through their mistakes and realize, oh, I shouldn't
have done that or I, you know, should have
warmed up first or, you know, whatever it is,
but make those mistakes so that they are learning
opportunities that then, um, the teenager can move forward
from those. Um, BUT I, I think seeing mistakes
as, I think it's good to make mistakes because
there are learning opportunities. Uh But we want to
make sure that uh those mistakes happen within an
environment where um you, you retain that flexibility and
you can sort of move forward, having learned something,
having him know something.
Yes, that makes perfect sense. And uh I mean,
ju just before we go, would you like to
perhaps leave us with a final with some final
thoughts, a final message particularly for teenagers that even
for us as adults, sometimes uncertainty when making decisions
is very scary and even more so for teenagers
who even know less about the world than we
do when they are very uncertain about everything and
even their own values and so on. So what
would be a positive final message here for the
teenagers when dealing with things like uncertainty?
I think one of the most powerful things for
me in this work is seeing youth develop who
they are through the questions that the decision maker
moves, ask of them and then taking that thinking
and that knowledge and taking action with it so
that they begin to move through the world in
a way that, um, in a way that has
integrity for them, that's pretty, pretty powerful because I
think kids, I mean, kids today are definitely dealing
with a lot of uncertainty and there is, you
know, there's a lot of fear wrapped up in
that for them. Like on the big global scale,
there, there's a ton of uncertainty about our world
and, and certainly youth in North America are feeling
that um given the data. So in that place,
it's nice to have a map and it doesn't
reduce or eliminate the uncertainty, but it helps them
feel um like they know a know a way
to move through it and to navigate through that
uncertainty as opposed to, you know, stopping to think
or just what, what do I, what am I
gonna do? Like here's some smaller piece, questions piece
by piece that you can take as you move
through your those those choices.
And so one of the things we do in
the book is for each of the moves, we
try to um provide some very practical tips um
that uh to kind of operationalize, be very practical
so that we aren't just talking in theories but
very practical steps. The book also has a lot
of stories. Brooke and I both believe very strongly
in the power of stories. Um But II, I
think in terms, I think one of the things
that teenagers I know many of the adults I
know, um, they don't quite know how to engage
in the world in this world of ours. Like,
how do they connect with the world? Um, AND
I think the, the way to engage is through
your choices. So if you get better at making
choices that gives you new opportunities for engagement and
for finding out about yourself, because, um, I think
adults tend to know more about the world than
teenagers, but the teenagers know more about themselves. The
teenagers are the one that, that who know about
themselves. So if we can activate that, um you
know, we, we need their input, we need, we,
we need the input. My generation hasn't done a
fantastic job at, at uh you know, being in
the world and being on our planet. I think
we need the input, creative input of those, those
uh kids between, you know, 12 and 25. Um
AND their values and s and see what kind
of world they can shape. So I think anything
we can do to encourage that will have the
side benefit as they get engaged. I think that
fear the depression, the feeling of being a little
bit overwhelmed with the world is likely to, to
go down because they're engaged because they're seeing that
ownership that uh that we talked about earlier. So
very simple thing, making good choices, but supporting the
choices that uh that teens make based on their
values
great. So the book is again sorting it out,
supporting teenage decision making. I'm leaving a link to
it in the description box of the interview. And
uh Doctor Gregory and Moore. Uh WOULD you also
like to tell the audience where they can find
your work on the internet?
It's published by Cambridge Cambridge University Press. Um And
it's also, I think it's available through many of,
of the big, the big outlets uh and through
uh you know, a lot of people have bookstores
in their neighborhood and I think, and it should
be available through those bookstores as well.
Uh Yes, but I was also asking about your
other work. I mean, where people can find you
and your other work on the internet.
We uh we both have websites that we're linking,
things like that too. So you can look up
Brooke Moore dot C A or Robin Gregory dot
Ca, I believe Robin and uh and go about
it that way pretty easy to find. I think.
So. Uh And maybe, and go through us to
the sort of network, we both have a lot
of collaborators like Brooke has mentioned some of these
amazing teachers in Delta. You know, we both have
amazing colleagues. Uh There's a group at University of
British Columbia, we work with um Judy Halbert Linda
Ker. So, you know, we're, we're, we're embedded in
a really great group of people. So it's, it's
not just us, it's, it's uh it's quite a,
quite a bunch of really cool collaborators.
Great. So thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a great pleasure to talk to you.
Thank you for the opportunity, Ricardo.
Yeah, thanks Ricardo. You're a great interviewer, by the
way.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Al Adam Castle Matthew Whitten
Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in nai
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel, Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall, her
J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel K
Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel s friends, David
Sloan Wilson. Ya dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter,
Romani Charlotte, Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo Stassi
Na Me, Gary G Alman, Samo Zal Ari and
Y. Polton John Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden
Broder Douglas Fry Franca, Bela Gil Cortez or Scott
Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke
Loki. Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo David
Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey Junior, Old
Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert Grassy
Zorn. Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick Mark Temple,
Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin
Gilbert Jessica, a week in the Brendan Nicholas Carlson
Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentine Steinman, Perlis Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali
Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David
Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers is our web,
Jim Frank Luca Stina, Tom Vig and Bernard N
Cortes Dixon Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin John Carlman Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden.
And to my executive producers Matthew Levander Sergi, Adrian
Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all.